---
title: Quantitative Neuroscience
semesters:
  - Spring
credits: 3
---

## Catalog Description

Introduction to mathematical modeling and computational analysis of
neuronal systems, Hodgkin-Huxley model, dynamical systems methods,
neuronal networks, models for neurological disease.

## Prerequisites

Math 1152 (152) or 1157 or permission of instructor.

## Text

*[Foundations of Mathematical Neuroscience]{.underline}*, by G. Bard
Ermentrout and David H. Terman

## ## Purpose

Mathematical models and computational methods have been very useful in
understanding biological mechanisms underlying neuronal behavior. The
Hodgkin‐Huxley model, for example, has formed the basis for our
understanding of how action potentials are generated and how they
propagate along a nerve axon. More recently, mathematical models have
been used to help understand cellular processes responsible for both
normal and pathological firing patterns that arise in a wide range of
neuronal systems. Examples include models for sensory processing, motor
control, neurological disease, sleep rhythms and working memory.

This course provides a detailed introduction to how mathematical and
computational methods have been used to both develop and analyze models
that arise in neuroscience. We begin by deriving the Hodgkin‐Huxley
model and then describe dynamical system methods for analyzing models.
After discussing the dynamics of single neurons, we consider neuronal
networks and describe how different types of population firing patterns
depend on biological details, such as the intrinsic properties of
individual neurons and synaptic coupling. We conclude by considering
specific brain systems.

## ## Topics List

1.  Overview: Neurons, synapses, neuronal firing patterns

2.  Hodgkin‐Huxley Model: Resting potential, Nernst equation,
    Goldman‐Hodgkin‐Katz equation, cable equation, action potential

3.  Dynamics I: Introduction to differential equations; phase‐planes;
    oscillations

4.  Dynamics II: Stability analysis, bifurcation theory, numerical
    methods

5.  Single cell dynamics I: Propagating action potentials; rhythmic
    behavior

6.  Single cell dynamics II: Variety of channels, bursting oscillations;
    dendrites; multi‐compartment models

7.  Synapses: Simple networks

8.  Networks: Classification of network behavior; synchrony, role of
    different types of channels and coupling

9.  Specific brain systems: Possible topics include models for working
    memory, vision, olfaction, sleep, Parkinson's tremor, stroke

10. Presentation of projects
